.TH ENVM 1 "March 2026" "envm 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
envm \- CLI tool for managing .env files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B envm
.RI [ command ]
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B envm
(env manager) is a CLI tool for managing
.B .env
files within a project. It provides set\-theoretic comparison, flexible merge strategies, named snapshots, validation, and template generation.
.PP
envm is project\-scoped \(em it operates on
.B .env*
files in the current working directory. A
.B .envm/
directory stores project\-level configuration, snapshots, and schema.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B init \fR[\fB\-\-schema\fR]
Initialize envm in the current project. Creates the
.B .envm/
directory with a default config. Use
.B \-\-schema
to auto\-generate a validation schema from existing env files.
.TP
.B list\fR, \fBls
List all
.B .env*
files in the current directory with their variable counts.
.TP
.B get \fIkey \fR[\fB\-\-file \fIpath\fR]
Get the value of a key from an env file. Defaults to
.BR .env .
.TP
.B set \fIKEY=VALUE \fR[\fB\-\-file \fIpath\fR]
Set a key\-value pair in an env file. Creates the file if it doesn't exist.
.TP
.B unset \fIkey \fR[\fB\-\-file \fIpath\fR]
Remove a key from an env file. The
.B \-\-file
flag supports glob patterns like
.BR .env.* .
.TP
.B diff\fR, \fBcompare \fIfiles... \fR[\fIoptions\fR]
Compare two or more env files using set operations. This is the flagship feature.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-only \fIfilter
Set operation filter. One of:
.BR union " (default),"
.BR intersection ,
.BR diff ,
.BR xor ,
or a file label
.RB ( a ", " b ", " "a,b" ).
.TP
.B \-\-format \fItype
Output format:
.B table
(default) or
.BR json .
.RE
.TP
.B merge \fIfiles... \fR[\fIoptions\fR]
Merge two or more env files into a single output.
.RS
.TP
.B \-o\fR, \fB\-\-output \fIfile
Output file path (required unless
.B \-\-stdout
is used).
.TP
.B \-\-stdout
Write merged output to stdout.
.TP
.B \-\-strategy \fIname
Merge strategy:
.BR union " (default),"
.BR intersection ,
.BR a .
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Show what would be written without writing.
.RE
.TP
.B clone\fR, \fBcp \fIsource dest \fR[\fIoptions\fR]
Duplicate an env file, optionally modifying keys.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-set \fIKEY=VALUE
Override or add a key. Repeatable.
.TP
.B \-\-unset \fIKEY
Remove a key. Repeatable, comma\-separated.
.RE
.TP
.B template \fIfile \fR[\fIoptions\fR]
Generate a
.B .env.example
or template from a real env file.
.RS
.TP
.B \-o\fR, \fB\-\-output \fIfile
Output file path. Defaults to stdout.
.TP
.B \-\-placeholder
Generate placeholder hints based on key names and value patterns.
.TP
.B \-\-keep\-defaults
Preserve non\-sensitive values (booleans, ports, localhost).
.RE
.TP
.B validate \fIfiles... \fR[\fIoptions\fR]
Validate env files against a schema.
.RS
.TP
.B \-\-schema \fIpath
Path to schema file. Default:
.BR .envm/schema.json .
.TP
.B \-\-strict
Treat keys not defined in the schema as errors.
.TP
.B \-\-format \fItype
Output format:
.B text
(default) or
.BR json .
.RE
.TP
.B schema generate \fIfiles...
Infer a validation schema from existing env files. Writes to
.BR .envm/schema.json .
.TP
.B snapshot\fR, \fBsnap \fIsubcommand
Manage named snapshots of env file state.
.RS
.TP
.B save \fIname \fR[\fIfiles...\fR]
Save a snapshot. Defaults to all
.B .env*
files.
.TP
.B list
List all saved snapshots.
.TP
.B show \fIname
Display the contents of a snapshot.
.TP
.B restore \fIname \fR[\fB\-\-file \fIname\fR] [\fB\-\-dry\-run\fR]
Restore files from a snapshot.
.TP
.B delete \fIname
Delete a snapshot.
.RE
.TP
.B sort \fIfile \fR[\fB\-o \fIfile\fR]
Sort an env file alphabetically. Overwrites in place unless
.B \-o
is specified.
.TP
.B normalize \fIfile
Output a normalized version of an env file to stdout. Sorts keys, strips comments and whitespace, applies consistent quoting. Does not modify the original file.
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-V\fR, \fB\-\-version
Output the version number.
.TP
.B \-h\fR, \fB\-\-help
Display help for a command.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Validation errors or command failure.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B .envm/config.json
Project\-level configuration.
.TP
.B .envm/schema.json
Validation schema for env files.
.TP
.B .envm/snapshots/
Directory containing named snapshots as JSON files.
.SH EXAMPLES
List all env files:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ envm ls
.fi
.RE
.PP
Compare staging and production:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ envm diff .env.staging .env.production
.fi
.RE
.PP
Show only keys that differ:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ envm diff .env.staging .env.production \-\-only diff
.fi
.RE
.PP
Merge with production values winning:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ envm merge .env.staging .env.production \-o .env.merged
.fi
.RE
.PP
Clone production for local dev with overrides:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ envm clone .env.production .env.local \-\-set "DEBUG=true" \-\-set "PORT=3001"
.fi
.RE
.PP
Generate a template with placeholders:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ envm template .env.production \-\-placeholder \-o .env.example
.fi
.RE
.PP
Normalize a messy env file:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ envm normalize .env.messy
.fi
.RE
.PP
Save and restore a snapshot:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ envm snapshot save "before\-migration"
$ envm snapshot restore "before\-migration" \-\-dry\-run
.fi
.RE
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at https://github.com/Saadkhalid913/envm/issues
.SH AUTHOR
Saad Khalid
